from https://tetris.wiki/Tetris_Guideline:

Indispensible Rules:

Logo
    The game must use a variant of the Tetris logo. The guideline contains rules for the use of the logo and what modifications are acceptable.

Playfield
    ~~The playfield (known as the Matrix in the guideline) is 10 cells wide and 20 cells tall,~~ with an additional 20 cell buffer zone above the top of the playfield, usually hidden or obstructed by the field frame. If the hardware permits, a sliver of the 21st row is shown to aid players manipulate the active piece in that area. Some games have a smaller matrix, such as Tetris Giant.

Super Rotation System
    Super Rotation System (also known as SRS) specifies tetromino rotation and wall kicks. SRS defines 5 points of rotation, each with a different purpose.

        Visual rotation - The natural rotation of a tetromino.
        Right/Left wall kick - Kick off an obstruction on the right or left.
        Floor kick - Kick off the floor, for when a tetromino has landed. Without kicks no rotation would be possible in some cases.
        Out of right well kick - If a tetromino is in a well, it can be rotated out.
        Out of left well kick - If a tetromino is in a well, it can be rotated out.

    Additionally, all rotations are reversible, if one is possible, the opposite is also possible. This is what allows T-Spin Triples to exist with the "Left out of well kick". There may be an option to disable wall kicks. For later games, Initial Rotation System (IRS) may be included; IRS allows piece rotations to be made during ARE by holding a rotation button.[6]

Tetromino starting positions
    Tetrominoes appear on the 21st and 22nd rows of the playfield, centered and rounded to the left when needed. They must start with their flat side down, and move down immediately after appearing.

    Recent modern games would have the spawning positions lower by one or two rows, such as tetris.com.

Lock Down
    There are three types of Lock Down defined by the guideline, Infinite Placement Lock Down (or infinity), Extended Placement Lock Down (or move reset), and Classic Lock Down (or step reset). A piece has 0.5 seconds after landing on the stack before it locks down; for games with Master mode, the lock down delay value will decrease per level when the gravity is 20G. With infinity, rotating or moving the piece will reset this timer. With move reset, this is limited to 15 moves/rotations. Finally step reset will only reset the timer if the piece moves down a row. Some games have an option to change between 2 or 3 of these modes; later games solely use move reset.

Piece preview
    The piece previews (known as the Next Queue in the guideline) show the player the next pieces that will come into play. Some games have up to six previews, and some the option to change the amount. The queue can either be displayed on the right or the top of the playfield, with the next active piece being the closest to the top of the playfield. Pieces should be displayed in their starting orientations.

Hold
    Hold is a mechanism that allows the player to store the active piece in the hold queue for later use. Only one piece can be in the hold queue. If there is already a piece in the hold queue, and the player holds the active piece, they are swapped, and the piece resets at the top of the playfield, becoming the new active piece. Hold cannot be used again until the piece locks down. Some games don't have the required space to display a hold piece, or that lack the necessary amount of buttons, may skip this mechanic. The combination of hold piece and Random Generator allows the player to play forever. For later games, Initial Hold System (IRS) may be included; IHS allows the next pieces to be held instantly during ARE by holding the Hold button.

Piece Colors
    Colors correspond to the shape of the tetromino.

    Shape 	I 	        J 	        L 	    O 	    S 	    Z 	    T
    Color 	light blue 	dark blue 	orange 	yellow 	green 	red 	magenta
    
Random Generator
    The Random Generator (also known as "random bag" or "7 bag") determines the sequence of tetrominoes during gameplay. One of each of the 7 tetrominoes are shuffled in a "bag", and are dealt out one by one. When the bag is empty, a new one is filled and shuffled.

Ghost piece
    The ghost piece is a player aid that allows them to preview where pieces will fall to. It is usually semi transparent or represented by an outline, and does not interact with the active piece in any way. There is sometimes an option to disable it.

Controller mappings
    Standard mappings for console and handheld gamepads:
    Up, Down, Left, Right on joystick perform locking hard drop, non-locking soft drop (except first frame locking in some games), left shift, and right shift respectively.
    Left fire button rotates 90 degrees counterclockwise, and right fire button rotates 90 degrees clockwise.
    Standard mappings different from console/handheld gamepads for computer keyboards:
    Left and right arrow keys: Piece shifting
    Up arrow key: Rotating 90 degrees clockwise
    Down arrow key: Non-locking soft drop
    Space bar: Locking hard drop
    C key / Shift key: Hold piece
    Z key / Left Control key: Rotating 90 degrees counterclockwise
    Standard mappings for mobile keypads
    Standard mappings for remote controls

Tetris Glossary
    Terms used in the user manual: "Tetriminos" not "tetrominoes" or "tetrads" or "pieces", letter names not "square" or "stick", etc. There are many other terms as well, most of them not used by this wiki, instead generic names are used.

Timings
    Marathon speed curve is based on that used in Tetris Worlds.
    Designated soft drop speed. Details vary between guideline versions.
    0.5 second lock delay when gravity is less than 20G.

Levels
    Player may only level up by clearing lines. Required lines depends on the game. Players can choose the level they wish to start on.

Music
    Game must include a version of Korobeiniki. Note that The Tetris Company holds a sound trademark on the variation of the song used in Tetris games.

Game over conditions
    The player tops out when a piece is spawned overlapping at least one block, a piece locks completely above the visible portion of the playfield, or a block is pushed above the 20-row buffer zone.

Scoring
    Scoring system, including Back-to-Back recognition rules
    Combo recognition
    Perfect clear recognition (for later games)

Garbage
    Line attack garbage system in multiplayer.

T-Spin detection
    T-Spin rules based on the 3-corner method, and T-Spin Mini rules based on the pointing side cell method.


Recommended but non-mandatory

    30 Hz DAS, as seen in Puyo Puyo Tetris and Tetris Effect. The following piece handling values are as follows (in 120Hz / 60FPS time):
        Delayed Auto Shift (DAS): 10 frames (≅ 167 milliseconds / 6Hz)
        Auto-repeat rate (ARR): 2 frames (≅ 33 milliseconds / 30Hz)
        Entry delay (ARE): 6 frames (≅ 100 milliseconds / 10Hz)
    Earlier guidance suggested DAS no faster than Tetris Zone. [1] (However, some Japanese games blend the Guideline with the Sega tradition of 1G DAS: Tetris New Century, Kiwamemichi, and the TGM series.)
    Marathon, Sprint, and Ultra modes. In general, Sprint and Ultra will only be omitted for hardware or design reasons.
    Game title should begin with "Tetris".